i remember when you first showed me this
program i i definitely showed this to a
lot of my friends and i was like it's
mesmerizing
i could just sit and watch this honestly
for hours it's just
it is beautiful so this one is also
single bricks but this time the single
bricks can also stick to the neighbors
if we just look at what happens you see
they fall down
but they actually stick they stick to it
right it's like they're magnetic
exactly to either side yeah yeah
then you zoom out again it looks
basically the same as tetris
right so one so as fun as it is to use
the tetris bricks there's nothing but
there's nothing in this particular
there's nothing special at all
um i see there's obviously no scientific
literature from the tetris model
there's a lot of physical literature on
this one which is called ballistic
deposition so that's
that's the one where you just have
single bricks but they stick to
neighbors
right because that's somehow one of the
simplest ones you can say it's easier to
formulate
the ballistic deposition model you have
the the bricks coming down
and then you have those three choices
and it's picking the maximum
because it's going to be the tallest one
so it's either adding to the top of the
stack
or sticking to the side of a stack but
it's the first the first one that it
interacts with yeah within its three
range of three pixels that's called them
whereas here you're saying same idea but
it's picking one of those
to interact with completely at random
yeah okay
right and then this gives completely
different behavior yeah
okay so what so what do we see
when we do that the ballistic deposition
model with it picking randomly
right then you see something like that
let's see so at this stage
it looks somewhat similar to what we
said
i was about to say you have the
impression that it might have a feeling
there could be a difference yeah but you
you do start to see that you know some
bitter stuff moving much faster you
actually don't really
so here it looks like it's actually
pretty high on yes uh
so if we if we kind of zoom out we see
that
now there's actually really tall peaks
yes
right okay that's all now it looks
different now you're right now
it's very different so you have these
very tall towers yes yes
and so you have these big jumps and they
don't get any smaller
and also very big values or like
as well yeah so this is a completely
different behavior this is a completely
different behavior so that's a
completely different
universality class so to speak okay
can you get more universality classes
through similar kinds of models or
do we know about that is yes still to be
discovered but still to be discovered to
some extent right so there's some of
them we know so we know
the one that the tetris game lives in uh
is called the kpz universality class
okay so then there is the one of the
symmetric interface fluctuations which
is called the edwardsville
universality class which some sense if
you
take a snapshot at fixed time you
wouldn't tell the difference from the
kpz and the edwards working so
if you look at a movie you actually see
the difference they behave differently
yeah and then there's this one which is
different as well does this one have a
name yet no well we call that
that process we call it the brownian
castle because
well i like these yeah
there do seem to be others but it's not
there aren't that many of them right so
it's not easy to come up with a new
model that actually behaves differently
from
from yeah so if you just play around
more than randomly it's something that
is
roughly these type of features um
[Music]
there are very good chances that it's
going to be in one of these three
classes and this one is a naturally
occurring phenomena this is
this one is not so natural because of
this lack of cohesiveness
right so here you you have these very
large jumps these kind of tall towers
forming
so and that in in somehow natural
processes of that type
it's not something that tends to form if
you think of this as something like a
physical interface
that would not be a very natural
behavior well yeah these these i think
you mentioned before these kind they're
like almost like discontinuities aren't
they
they are they are really discontinuation
so there is a limiting process that has
discontinued
dense sets of discontinuities it's like
breaking yeah
it's like snapping so that's why it's
fine yeah well you wouldn't expect it to
actually but it does well at least one
can somehow
tell oneself a story so if you take some
there are some
population genetics models that where
you could tell yourself a story that
something along these lines could
actually occur and then
so in situations where the where for
some reason the
population is actually spread out uh in
a one-dimensional way
like along a beach along a very long
beach for example or something like that
okay but but
so how much away i am yeah for currents
that's fascinating is is this currently
what you're working on or is this
related to
what you're doing at the moment okay
well so this one it's one
project i've been working on with the
post staff of mine and we are currently
wrapping it up okay yeah yeah
and and then what else are you doing
with your
with your time enjoy spend very very
well you know sounded like i was
sorry i didn't mean that to come across
as like what else are you doing
this is amazing we love this if you said
it's wrapping up
i'm guessing you're doing right yeah
yeah sure thanks uh
yeah so what well so one of the projects
that uh that i'm currently working on
with a couple of coffers
is one where the mathematics is somehow
related to the type of
objects that we've been seeing here but
then
well there isn't such an easy way of
visualizing the objects that you get
but they are related to something called
the young mills
quantum field theory it's some sort of
euclidean version of young mills quantum
field theory
which is pretty well understood at least
the free theory is pretty well
understood in two dimensions
okay what one really wants to understand
is four dimensions because time counts
as a dimension yeah
and so we are currently working on well
both
the two-dimensional case from a
different perspective from what people
have done before
um and on the three-dimensional case
probably the really interesting cases
the four dimensional case
uh unfortunately the tools that we're
using
they just break down precisely in four
dimensions so in principle
you can get to just below four in some
sense you can you know you can work in
non-integer dimensions in a certain way
and
you can really go to four minus a little
bit dimensions but
not four dimensions okay so at least not
for the moment
yeah and is that related to the actual
the angles millennium problem the young
mills millennium problem
if you rephrased it somewhat in
probabilistic terms it would be like
constructing the object that we want to
construct in four dimensions
where we don't know how to do anything
um
and then furthermore prove that it has a
certain property which is called the
mascot
yes the infamous yes which is
another kind of one so it's even much
much harder
but okay but but but as you say you can
go sort of up to just below for
with this kind of work yeah you never
know
just reaching that reaching that's a
little gap okay
so we was this you were you thought
right let's have a go at
yangmills this appeals to me quantum
field theory or was this more
you were doing your your work here these
interfaces
probabilistic and it's sort of somehow
led
towards that area like how do you yeah
yeah one sort of one left to the other
yeah yeah and and i think that's often
how how you work you know you think
about a problem but then it raises other
questions
or if you say oh maybe i've got the
tools to actually look at this other
thing
yeah well best of luck i hope you can
get to the four dimensions that would be
amazing
and thank you so much for showing me
tetris and
interfaces and forest fires it's it's
great
it's been great thank you martin
you